Science and director of preclinical research at the TxBDC, has been a part of the VNS project since its earliest studies. "It's been an incredibly rewarding experience to see this technology evolve from early discovery experiments in the lab to clinical benefits in patients," Hays said. "This whole process truly highlights the value of team-based science." More than a decade ago, Dr. Robert Rennaker, professor of neuroscience and the Texas Instruments Distinguished Chair in Bioengineering, began to design an innovative implantable VNS device that was much smaller and less expensive than devices already on the market. The most recent wireless version of the device is about the size of a dime. "The technology we have is above and beyond anything else that's out there. The device is about 50 times smaller than our version from just three years ago," he said. "The 49 people in the Dallas area with our devices have a combined 100 years of experience with it implanted. There have been no issues; the devices are all still functioning. And they don't interfere with typical medical care; you can have an MRI, a CT scan or an ultrasound." The next step in the PTSD research -- a double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 pilot study -- is ongoing in Dallas and Austin. "We hope that it will represent another step toward FDA approval of a treatment that doesn't exist now, and it would be invented, tested and delivered by UT Dallas, as was the case for upper-limb recovery after stroke," Kilgard said. Licensed clinical psychologist Dr. Mark Powers, a research center director of the Trauma Research Center at BSWRI, is the lead and co-corresponding author of the study. Driven by his desire to improve quality of life among people who experience psychological trauma, Powers said that VNS has "changed the game" by improving both treatment efficacy and its tolerability. "VNS has changed my work dramatically," he said. "Our gold-standard treatments for PTSD have about an 85% response rate, with 40% no longer having their diagnosis, and a 20% dropout rate. Soon we could have the option of VNS for people who don't get better with cognitive behavioral therapy alone." Powers added that his collaboration with UTD has a multidisciplinary synergy that he regards as rare. "With this alliance, we have people doing the preclinical and the clinical work at the same time, giving each other feedback and ideas," he said. "Neither one of our groups could do this alone." Other UTD-affiliated study authors included Dr. Jane Wigginton, medical director and co-director of the UT Dallas Clinical and Translational Research Center; Amy Porter MBA'20, TxBDC director of operations; and Holle Carey Gallaway MBA'23, TxBDC research biomedical engineer. Researchers from Southern Methodist University, UT Austin and Baylor Scott & White Health also contributed to the study. The research was funded by a grant (N66001-15-2-4057) from the Biological Technologies Office at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, part of the Department of Defense.